So promises are a really important concept in Javascript and you'll see them a lot, especially in modern
Javascript which we are of course learning in this course.
They're everywhere as you will also see once we dive into HTTP requests and as you will also see in many
projects you work on as soon, as you start working with async code, promises will be used a lot.
Now promises are great and I like the syntax a lot, with then and catch,
I think that's very clear to read. It makes it clear that these steps execute after each other, it at
the same time makes clear that get position executes next to next with this line and this line basically,
so that we don't wait for these steps to finish just to then execute these steps.
So really great to have promises,
it's really a great syntax that makes working with async code so much easier.
Now let's temporarily comment out these two lines, I don't need them right now and therefore all we
do in track user handler, we get the user position, we catch a potential error here and then we have
this then block here where we either wait for the timer here, where if we successfully get the position
we skip the catch block and therefore then here executes on the result of the timer or we get the on
the go text here.
Of course you might want a different error handling here in then and basically react depending on whether
you've got the timer which expired or you got an error before and that of course depends on what data
you return in the steps before
but for now let's say that's the approach we have and hence if I reload here and we click track me and
we click allow, you'll see we'll wait
and at some point of time we'll have the position and we have the timer in there, expired and then we
get the output we expect.
So that's what we saw earlier already.
Now nothing wrong with doing it like this, modern Javascript also has an alternative syntax to that which
and that's really important to memorize, which is why I'm saying it right away, which still utilizes promises
but which actually allows you to omit the then and catch method here and therefore make your code look
a bit more like synchronous code,
so the normal code you write everywhere without promises than it actually is and that's async await.
Now what is async await about? You can use async await in functions and only in functions, that's important,
you enable it so to say by adding the async keyword in front of your function keyword, for functions
created like this, you would use async here in front of your function name, so on the right side of the equal sign,
so that's how you do it on expressions, on declarations you add it here in the front of the function and then
with async added here, the function internally changes so to say or what happens in there invisibly changes.
With async in front of it,
this function automatically returns a promise, you'll see here in my tooltip it tells me that this returns
a promise.
Please note, I never call return in this function, only in the nested functions but not in this function
itself,
I don't return a promise here. If I remove async, we actually therefore correctly see void here which
basically means it returns nothing
but as soon as I add async, this changes and now my IDE tells me that this returns a promise, my IDE
is correct. By adding async here which is a keyword supported by Javascript,
this entire function wraps all its content into one big promise,
so it basically does this wrapping up here with new promise and so on behind the scenes for us and wraps all
that code in that initialization function you pass to the promise constructor, it does that behind the
scenes.
So that's all in a promise, okay.
One effect of that of course is that you could now call then in the place where track user handler is
executed.
Now here the browser executes that for us and the browser of course will not automatically add some
then block here and here, I also don't want to execute anything on that
and you don't have to,
it's just one thing you could do.
The more interesting thing now is that inside of this invisible promise, you have access to another keyword
because we added async here,
we can use the await keyword. We add that in front of any promise,
so for example here get position returns a promise,
so in front of that we can use await.
Now what does await then do if we add it in front of a promise?
Well it kind of waits for the promise to resolve or to fail and the next line thereafter will only execute
once that is the case.
The data which might be resolved, so position data for example here will then be returned so that here
we can say posData equal await get position.
Now I can basically omit that code line here,
don't return set timer but instead call set timer which I previously did inside of this first then block,
so after get position resolved in the next line.
So now I wait for this get position promise to resolve
and only thereafter this line executes, the result of get position, of this resolving of this
promise is stored in this constant,
thereafter we set the timer. Now the timer returned some data,
so here we can have the timer data stored in a constant as well if we need it,
I have to add await here now and we're good.
Of course you don't have to store the data, if you're not interested,
you can omit this but here, I want to store it.
So now we await this and once this is done, we move on to the next line and
we await this.
Now we have to comment out this code,
it will not work anymore,
instead now we refactored it to look like that.
Now I can console log my timer data which I have here and my posData like this and I can get rid
of that variable because of the way this code was rewritten.
So at the moment, we lost the error handling but other than that, this is of course a more concise way
of writing this, of the two then blocks we had down there.
If we saved that, let's see if it works, if we reload, click track me and click allow,
we now have to wait to get the user position and then wait for the two second timer to expire
but then we should see same output as before.
So except for the error handling which we temporarily lost,
this seems way better but what does it actually do?
Doesn't it break all the things I taught you about Javascript, that Javascript is non-blocking and so
on
because here, we clearly are blocking the execution, right?
Well it looks like we are and that can be the dangerous thing about async await.
It looks like we're changing the way Javascript works, that suddenly, we wait for async code to finish
and that we block script execution until that is the case
but that's actually thankfully not what's happening.
Instead as I mentioned, async wraps everything inside of track user handler into one big promise and
then it actually goes ahead and whenever we await for some other promise which is wrapped in that big
promise to resolve, it in the end just returns this as part of that big promise it created for us and
adds an invisible then block, in the then block it will then get the result of this promise and store
it in this variable which is available in that big overall promise
so to say. So in the end, it replicates this then block behind the scenes you could say and the same of course
for this promise.
So it doesn't really block code execution,
you could say this code simply gets transformed behind the scenes,
it gets transformed to a version which still uses then blocks,
it's the normal promise API,
the normal promise object with the normal then method, just transformed behind the scenes,
so that we as a developer can write shorter code and the overhead of adding the then blocks and so on
is done by Javascript behind the scenes you could say
and that's really important to take away. Async await does not change the way Javascript works or
executes, it just transforms this code behind the scenes and therefore we just have a look that's different
and it looks like we're actually waiting here and we are of course in this function but only in this function
because we have a couple of then methods chained after each other here in the end, that's what's happening
here and therefore we can reap the benefits of having more readable code without any downsides,
you just have to be aware of the fact that there is no magic going on and Javascript is not suddenly
changing but instead, that we're just having the then stuff going on behind the scenes and it can be
a common error source or something which if you're new to Javascript can be hard to understand where
you think that now you're changing the way Javascript works,
you are not, you're having an invisible transformation here.